OPNOTEs are important to the investigative and reporting lifecycle throughout the Cyberspace Operations (CO) process. It is vital that each of the participating CDAs record standardized OPNOTEs. They must be clear and concise including, but not limited to, the following:
Time/date 
Host name
Internet Protocol (IP) address
Description 

Providing context to the action or artifact enables readers to understand severity, scale, and scope of what is being described. Taking detailed notes allows teams to work effectively, efficiently, and easily overcome issues with misleading and uncertain data. 


Producing fact-based, evidence-supported notes of actions performed supports a defensible timeline. This timeline could be used to deconflict activity performed outside the investigating team. Creating detailed OPNOTEs provide both teams and system owners clarity on when and what was performed during the investigative process. This information is used by system owners to determine if any actions performed impacted the environment. 


What process allows a CDA to document and retain defensible records of technical actions performed during an investigative process?
Structure of OPNOTEs
Though many organizations have specific requirements and guidance for OPNOTEs, this task covers general structure and best practices that cross organizational boundaries. The use of column headers is a common way of ensuring that OPNOTEs are consistent row to row and are easily consumed. Generally, it is good to house OPNOTEs in a spreadsheet or table where column headers are easily assigned. This allows the reader to quickly locate information in relation to a specific detail such as hostname or IP address. The following sections outline example column headers that could be adopted for OPNOTE keeping processes.

﻿

Date and Time
﻿
Recording the date and time of the event or discovery of the artifact is important. The Date and Time columns are based on the timeframe in which the action was performed or discovered. This is not the date and time in which an artifact was logged by a platform or tool. Log analysis date- and time-stamping is usually listed in a different column for timeline building later. If performed properly, users create investigation-focused timelines to provide situation and after-action-related reporting.﻿

Subject
﻿
﻿The Subject column header describes the subject of the findings or related artifacts. The information takes many forms depending on the scope of the investigation. Commonly used attributes in this column include IP address, Uniform Resource Locator (URL), username, hostname, artifact, action, or indicator.

Description

﻿Always use concise, precise, and accurate information when describing the important action or artifact. The Description column is the most critical column as it provides context and explanation for the occurrence. The details in this column, when paired with the others mentioned, accurately describe what happened to the reader. This information directly impacts further analysis and decision-making efforts.

Supporting Information
﻿
This column header refers to files of various types, which pertain to and support information listed in the Subject column. Some examples of supporting information include system logs, Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) events, tool output, and screenshots. Pictures speak a thousand words so screenshots are the most valuable files to utilize as supporting information.

Tags
﻿
The Tags column is used to electronically mark one or more notes with a single attribute. This enables the user to search, filter, and group multiple related notes quickly and easily.

Recommendations
Things you should do:

Create detailed digital OPNOTEs compiled with supporting information such as screenshots
Protect OPNOTEs and limit access to prevent unauthorized or undesired modification
Include physical notes taken when computing devices are not available
Use multiple platforms to take OPNOTEs, if necessary
Create opportunities for centralized logging of multiple participants
Backup OPNOTEs and supporting information
Follow all classification guidelines for proper handling and dissemination of information
﻿

Things you should not do:

Save OPNOTEs to potentially infected hosts or networks 
Omit OPNOTEs because you are unsure or unfamiliar with the information
Stop recording out of laziness or assumption that someone else logged something
Omit notes because you made a mistake
Leave out information because it is sensitive in nature (however, follow classification guidelines)
Be afraid to use a mind map to convey complex relationships between log events
 
Record the output in the OPNOTEs spreadsheet. Include the following attributes:
Date: From the host OS taskbar 
Time: From the host OS taskbar Subject: 
Hostname or IP address of the host the command was run on
Description: Command run, OS info, system type info, statement about the analysis of output
Supporting Information: Path to command output file

Record the output in the OPNOTEs spreadsheet. Include the following attributes:
Date: From the host OS taskbar Time: From the host OS taskbar Subject: Hostname or IP address of the host the command was run onDescription: Command run, OS info, system type info, statement about the analysis of outputSupporting Information: Path to command output file

There are now two OPNOTE line entries in the provided spreadsheet. These two lines have the Date, Time, Subject, Description, and Supporting Information columns populated.

These entries represent clear and concise records of actions performed during the task. Retain this spreadsheet as proof that this task was completed successfully. Use this sheet going forward as a reference of how to record OPNOTEs. OPNOTEs are a required portion of this lesson any time hands-on actions are taken on a system.



















